Add CI/CD narrative (#1697)
astronomer/docs: astro/set-up-ci-cd.md

---
sidebar_label: 'Set up CI/CD'
title: 'Deploy code to Astro with CI/CD'
id: set-up-ci-cd
---

> Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) pipelines are programmatic workflows that automate key parts of the software development lifecycle, including code changes, builds, and testing. CI/CD enables teams to develop faster, more securely, and more reliably.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) pipelines are programmatic workflows that automate key parts of the software development lifecycle, including code changes, builds, and testing. CI/CD helps your organization develop faster, more securely, and more reliably.
```

There are many strategies for organizing your source code and building CI/CD pipelines, and each has its own benefits and limitations. Use this document to:

- Learn the benefits of CI/CD.

> - Determine what kind of Deployment and CI/CD system you want your team to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Determine what kind of Deployment and CI/CD strategy you want your organization to use.
```

> Then, see [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) for setup steps and examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you're ready to implement your CI/CD strategy, see [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) for setup steps and examples.
```

## Benefits of CI/CD on Astro

On Astro, you can use [Deployment API keys](api-keys.md) to automate your code deploys. Astronomer recommends hosting your Astro project source code in a version control tool, such as [GitHub](https://github.com/) or [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/), and setting up a CI/CD workflow for all production environments.

There are many benefits to configuring a CI/CD workflow on Astro. Specifically, you can:

- Avoid manually running `astro deploy` every time you make a change to your Astro project.
- Ensure that all changes to your Astro project are reviewed and approved by your team before they get pushed to Astro.
- Automate promoting code across development and production environments on Astro when pull requests to certain branches are merged.

> - Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or a failure.
```

- Configure more granular user permissions by managing access and changes to your Astro project source code in your version control tool.

## Choose a deploy strategy

You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many repositories and branches of your project you want to deploy deploy to Astro.

> When developing a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:
```
It appears you're using _strategy_ and _workflow_ interchangeably.  Choose one term and use it consistently.

> - How many branches of a project do you want to host on Astro? Do you need to deploy a single production branch to a Deployment, or do you also need to deploy a development branch?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How many branches of a project do you want to host on Astro? 
- Do you need to deploy a single production branch to a Deployment, or do you also need to deploy a development branch?
```

- How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Read the following topics to learn which combination of branches and repositories is right for your team. Advanced data teams might follow a custom CI/CD strategy that is not described here and is optimized for a particular use case or team structure. If you're not sure which CI/CD strategy is right for you, contact your customer success representative.

> ### Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single branch versus multiple branch repositories
```
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/104205257/211813223-1237f169-2293-41b9-935a-8449eb7f8d42.png)

> When you create a CI/CD pipeline, your first decision point whether to deploy one or multiple project branches to Astro through CI/CD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a CI/CD pipeline, you first must determine if you want to deploy one or multiple project branches to Astro through CI/CD.
```

#### Single branch

> The easiest and most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Git repository that corresponds to a single Astro project and Deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Git repository that corresponds to a single Astro project and Deployment.
```

This method assumes that you have:

> - 1 Astro project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Astro project.
```

Reviewer: From our style guide:

_...spell out whole numbers from zero through nine, and use numerals for 10 or greater. Use commas in numbers with four or more digits. Use more than instead of over. Over is a spatial term._

> - 1 Astro Workspace for your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Astro Workspace for your project.
```

> - 1 Astro Deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Astro Deployment.
```

> - 1 primary and permanent branch in your Git repository. Astronomer recommends `main`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One primary and permanent branch in your Git repository. Astronomer recommends `main`.
```

With this method, you can configure a CI/CD pipeline that deploys code to Astro every time a change is made to an Astro project file in your Git repository. To deploy a change to your project:

- Test all DAG and Astro project changes locally with the Astro CLI. See [Test and troubleshoot locally](test-and-troubleshoot-locally.md).

> - Create a new, short-lived branch in your Git repository with the change and open a Pull Request (PR) against the `main` branch for review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a new, temporary branch in your Git repository with the change and open a pull request against the `main` branch for review.
```

> - When the PR is approved and merged to `main`, the change is automatically deployed to your Deployment on Astro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the PR is approved and merged to the main branch, the change is automatically deployed to your Deployment on Astro.
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
id1[Local Astro project]-->|Push code change|id2[Feature branch]
subgraph Git repository
id2-->|Pull request| id3[Main branch]
end
id3-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id4[Astro Deployment]
```

Running all of your data pipelines in a single environment means that you don't have to pay for the infrastructure of multiple Deployments, but it limits your ability to test changes on Astro or on development datasets before they are deployed. Astronomer does not recommend this method for production use cases.

#### Multiple branches

> For small to medium-sized data teams running data pipelines in production, Astronomer recommends developing a CI/CD pipeline for multiple branches. With this method, you maintain 1 Git repository that has permanent branches for different versions of your Astro project. You also have multiple Astro Deployments for each of your branches. If you work at a larger organization, you can adapt this method by creating a Workspace for each team or business use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For small to medium-sized data teams running data pipelines in production, Astronomer recommends developing a CI/CD pipeline for multiple branches. With this method, you maintain one Git repository that has permanent branches for different versions of your Astro project. You also have multiple Astro Deployments for each of your branches. If you work at a larger organization, you can adapt this method by creating a Workspace for each team or business use case.
```

The multiple environment method assumes that you have:

> - 1 Astro project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Astro project.
```

> - 1 Astro Workspace for your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Astro Workspace for your project.
```

> - At least 2 primary branches in your Git repository that each represent an environment. Astronomer recommends `main` and `dev`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At least two primary branches in your Git repository that each represent an environment. Astronomer recommends naming the branches `main` and `dev`.
```

### Single repository vs. multiple repositories

Astro supports deploying DAG code changes separately from project configuration changes. If multiple team members work on a single Astro project, decide whether you need multiple Git repositories to separate their work and permissions.

When you make this decision, keep in mind how many branches of your project to host on Astro. Your CI/CD pipeline can manage deploying multiple branches across multiple repositories. See [Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories](singl-branch-vs-multiple-branch-repositories).

#### Single repository to a single Deployment

The most basic strategy is to have a single Git repository that hosts your entire Astro project. If you have multiple team members working on the project, they all commit to the same repository regardless of what changes they're making. This strategy is recommended if your project configurations are not sensitive and your DAG authors are comfortable making code changes within the context of a larger project, or if you have a single team member responsible for an entire Astro project. 

#### Multiple repositories to a single Deployment

> Using multi-repository CI/CD strategy, you can manage your DAGs in one repository and Astro project settings in another. Use this strategy to ensure that DAG authors and data operators have access only to their own files. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a multi-repository CI/CD strategy, you can manage your DAGs in one repository and Astro project settings in another. Use this strategy to ensure that DAG authors and data operators have access only to their own files. 
```

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[Git repository]
id5-->|Full project deploy|id3
id2-->|DAG-only deploy| id3[Astro Deployment]
```

> One drawback to this strategy is that you must keep any local copies of the Astro project in sync with both repositories in order to test Deployment code locally. Your team members might have inconsistencies in their local environments if they can't access code changes from other team members. Astronomer recommends setting up a `dev` Deployment where DAG authors can see and modify project configurations for testing purposes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One limitation of this strategy is that you must keep any local copies of the Astro project synchronized with both repositories in order to test Deployment code locally. Your team members might have inconsistencies in their local environments if they can't access code changes from other team members. Astronomer recommends setting up a `dev` Deployment where DAG authors can see and modify project configurations for testing purposes. 
```

This strategy requires enabling [DAG-only deploys](deploy-code.md#enable-dag-only-deploys-on-a-deployment) on the target Deployment and setting up your CI/CD pipeline on both Git repositories.

#### S3 bucket and Git repository to a single Deployment

Similarly to the multiple repository strategy, this strategy separates the management of DAGs and project configuration. DAGs are stored in an [S3 bucket](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), while Astro project configuration files are stored in a Git repository. 

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[S3 bucket]
id2-->|"DAG-only deploy </br>(Lambda function)" | id3[Astro Deployment]
id5-->|"Full project deploy </br> (CI/CD)"|id3
```

> If you migrated to Astro from MWAA, this strategy is useful for maintaining a similar workflow for DAG authors. You can set up a Lambda function to push DAGs to your Astronomer Deployment whenever DAG files are updated in your specific S3 bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you migrated to Astro from Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA), this strategy is useful for maintaining a similar workflow for DAG authors. You can set up a Lambda function to push DAGs to your Astronomer Deployment whenever DAG files are updated in your specific S3 bucket.
```

## Create a CI/CD pipeline

> The general process for creating an Astro CI/CD template is to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process for creating an Astro CI/CD template is:
```

> - Decide on a CI/CD strategy based on this document and your team's needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Selecting a CI/CD strategy after reviewing this document and the requirements of your team.
```

- Set up your repositories and permissions based on your CI/CD strategy.

> - Add one of Astronomer's [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or use the Astronomer-maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adding an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).
```

- Modify the template or GitHub action as needed for your use case. 

> If you use GitHub, Astronomer strongly recommends using the Astronomer-maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).(https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use GitHub, Astronomer recommends using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).(https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).
```

---
sidebar_label: 'Set up CI/CD'
title: 'Deploy code to Astro with CI/CD'
id: set-up-ci-cd
---

Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) pipelines are programmatic workflows that automate key parts of the software development lifecycle, including code changes, builds, and testing. CI/CD helps your organization develop faster, more securely, and more reliably.

There are many strategies for organizing your source code and building CI/CD pipelines, and each has its own benefits and limitations. Use this document to:

- Learn the benefits of CI/CD.

> - Determine what kind of Deployment and CI/CD workflow you want your organization to use.
> 
> When you're ready to implement your CI/CD workflow, see [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) for setup steps and examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Determine what kind of Deployment and CI/CD strategy you want your data team to use.

When you're ready to implement your CI/CD strategy, see [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) for setup steps and examples.
```

There are many benefits to configuring a CI/CD workflow on Astro. Specifically, you can:

- Avoid manually running `astro deploy` every time you make a change to your Astro project.
- Ensure that all changes to your Astro project are reviewed and approved by your team before they get pushed to Astro.
- Automate promoting code across development and production environments on Astro when pull requests to certain branches are merged.
- Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or a failure.
- Configure more granular user permissions by managing access and changes to your Astro project source code in your version control tool.

## Choose a deploy strategy

You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many repositories and branches of your project you want to deploy deploy to Astro.

> When developing a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When deciding on a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:
```

- At least two primary branches in your Git repository that each represent an environment. Astronomer recommends naming the branches `main` and `dev`.
- At least two Astro Deployments that each host different branches of your project.

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
id1[Local Astro project]-->|Push code change|id2[Feature branch]
subgraph Git repository
id2-->|Pull request| id3[Dev branch]
id3 --> id5[Main branch]
end
id3-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id4[Dev Deployment]
id5-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id6[Main Deployment]
subgraph Astro
id4
id6
end
```

This method provides your team with an additional environment on Astro to test before pushing changes to production. Each Deployment can contain separate versions of your code, as well as separate environmental configurations. If you use Snowflake, for example, your development Deployment on Astro can use a virtual data warehouse for development (`DWH Dev`), and your production Deployment can use a different virtual data warehouse for production (`DWH Prod`).

> ### Single repository vs. multiple repositories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single repository versus multiple repositories
```
From the Google developer documentation style guide:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/104205257/211829749-b873535c-ce3c-4c57-a9fb-768849f26414.png)

If you don't want to follow the style guide, create a new heading. For example:

_Benefits of a single repository over multiple repositories_

Reviewer: @jwitz it appears this change hasn't been implemented. If we're deviating from the style guide, we should discuss it and then document the deviation in our style guide.

There are many benefits to configuring a CI/CD workflow on Astro. Specifically, you can:

- Avoid manually running `astro deploy` every time you make a change to your Astro project.
- Ensure that all changes to your Astro project are reviewed and approved by your team before they get pushed to Astro.
- Automate promoting code across development and production environments on Astro when pull requests to certain branches are merged.
- Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or a failure.
- Configure more granular user permissions by managing access and changes to your Astro project source code in your version control tool.

## Choose a deploy strategy

You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many repositories and branches of your project you want to deploy to Astro.

When deciding on a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:

> - How many different environments do you need to adequately test your DAGs before deploying them to production?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention investment here, if they need the environments then they need them - investment shouldn't factor into their decision right?

> - How many different environments do you need to adequately test your DAGs before deploying them to production?

Author: If the DAGs are not very business critical maybe they don't want to spend the extra money to test them

> - How many different environments do you need to adequately test your DAGs before deploying them to production?

Reviewer 3: Agreed -- I think it's a realistic thing to keep in there?

> - How many different environments do you need to adequately test your DAGs before deploying them to production?

Reviewer 2: I had assumed that "Need" here implied that the environments were already costed in, and that folks setting this up understand that more computational environments = more money, but don't mind including it either.

> - How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Reviewer 2: I rephrased this question to lead with "How does your team work" and follow up with "Do you think multiple repos would help with that"

> - How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Reviewer 2: "- Do different teams work on different parts of your project? If so, do you need to host your Astro project in multiple repositories?"

> - How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Reviewer 3: "Do you need to limit DAG authors from managing dependencies and advanced configurations of your project? If so, do you need to host your Astro project in multiple repositories?"

Maybe this?

> - How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Reviewer 2: Settled on "Do you need to limit your DAG authors' access to sensitive project configurations? If so, do you need to host your Astro project in multiple repositories?"

    style Git fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Running all of your data pipelines in a single environment means that you don't have to pay for the infrastructure of multiple Deployments, but it limits your ability to test changes on Astro or on development datasets before they are deployed. Astronomer does not recommend this method for production use cases.

#### Multiple environments

For data teams running DAGs which are critical to your business, Astronomer recommends developing a CI/CD pipeline that supports multiple environments for running and testing different versions of your project. With this method, you maintain one Git repository that has permanent branches for different versions of your Astro project. You also have multiple Astro Deployments for each of your branches. If you work at a larger organization, you can adapt this method by creating a Workspace for each team or business use case.

The multiple environment method assumes that you have:

- One Astro project.
- One Astro Workspace for your project.
- At least two primary branches in your Git repository that each represent an environment. Astronomer recommends naming the branches `main` and `dev`.

> - At least two Astro Deployments that each host different branches of your project.

Reviewer 2: Is the database/ data warehouse point required? I thought it was possible to partition that resource so you could still use test data for test environments without breaking the entire thing. If we're going to add this assumption, we should elaborate more in the text about its purpose.

> - At least two Astro Deployments that each host different branches of your project.

Reviewer 3: You're probably right here. It's a common way to think about it (and recommend) but maybe we can add a note somewhere more appropriate? Maybe as a tip to this multiple environments section?

Edit: the snowflake example below might be sufficient. I'm fine w that

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
    classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
    classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Local Astro project]-->|Push code change|id2[Feature branch]
    subgraph Git ["Git repository"]
    id2-->|Pull request| id3[Dev branch]
    id3 --> id5[Main branch]
    end
    id3-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id4[Dev Deployment]
    id5-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id6[Main Deployment]
    subgraph Astro [Astro]
    id4
    id6
    end
    style Astro fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Git fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

This method provides your team with an additional environment on Astro to test before pushing changes to production. Each Deployment can contain separate versions of your code, as well as separate environmental configurations. If you use Snowflake, for example, your development Deployment on Astro can use a virtual data warehouse for development (`DWH Dev`), and your production Deployment can use a different virtual data warehouse for production (`DWH Prod`).

### Single repository versus multiple repositories

> Astro supports deploying DAG code changes separately from project configuration changes. If multiple team members work on a single Astro project, decide whether you need multiple Git repositories to separate their work and permissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On Astro, you can deploy DAG code changes separately from changes to the rest of your Astro project when [DAG-only deploys](deploy-code.md#deploy-dags-only) are enabled. This means that when you create a CI/CD pipeline for an Astro project, you can choose between the following strategies:

- Maintain a single Git repository for all files in your Astro project.
- Separate your DAGs from other project files and maintain multiple Git repositories.
- Store your DAGs in a cloud provider storage solution, such as AWS S3, and the rest of your Astro project files in a dedicated Git repository.
```

> When you make this decision, keep in mind how many branches of your project to host on Astro. Your CI/CD pipeline can manage deploying multiple branches across multiple repositories. See [Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories](#single-branch-versus-multiple-branch-repositories).

Reviewer 3: Are we trying to say that you don't have to equate this decision with the environment decision?

Reviewer 2: Tried updating this to make more sense

> When you make this decision, keep in mind how many branches of your project to host on Astro. Your CI/CD pipeline can manage deploying multiple branches across multiple repositories. See [Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories](#single-branch-versus-multiple-branch-repositories).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you make this decision, keep in mind how many branches of your project to host on Astro. Your CI/CD pipeline can manage deploying multiple branches across multiple repositories. See [Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories](#single-branch-versus-multiple-branch-repositories).

Astronomer recommends one centralized repository for a single Astro project.
```

#### Single repository to a single Deployment

> The most basic strategy is to have a single Git repository that hosts your entire Astro project. If you have multiple team members working on the project, they all commit to the same repository regardless of what changes they're making. This strategy is recommended if your project configurations are not sensitive and your DAG authors are comfortable making code changes within the context of a larger project, or if you have a single team member responsible for an entire Astro project. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For most teams, Astronomer recommends creating a single Git repository for each Workspace and Astro project or use case. This means that your team can make changes to your DAGs, Python packages, and Deployment configuration in a single place. This strategy keeps your code history centralized, makes it easy for developers to contribute code, and avoids synchronization problems across files.

This strategy is recommended if:

- A single team is responsible for both developing DAGs and maintaining Deployments on Astro.
- Your don't need to support a dedicated repository for DAGs across your organization.
- Less than 30 people interact with or contribute to your  Apache Airflow use case.
```

#### Multiple repositories to a single Deployment

> Using a multi-repository CI/CD strategy, you can manage your DAGs in one repository and Astro project settings in another. Use this strategy to ensure that DAG authors and data operators have access only to their own files. 

Reviewer 3: Similar to above, let's expand on why you'd have to do this?

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
    id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[Git repository]
    id5-->|Full project deploy|id3
    id2-->|DAG-only deploy| id3[Astro Deployment]
```

One limitation of this strategy is that you must keep any local copies of the Astro project synchronized with both repositories in order to test Deployment code locally. Your team members might have inconsistencies in their local environments if they can't access code changes from other team members. Astronomer recommends setting up a `dev` Deployment where DAG authors can see and modify project configurations for testing purposes. 

This strategy requires enabling [DAG-only deploys](deploy-code.md#enable-dag-only-deploys-on-a-deployment) on the target Deployment and setting up your CI/CD pipeline on both Git repositories.

#### S3 bucket and Git repository to a single Deployment

> Similar to the multiple repository strategy, this strategy separates the management of DAGs and project configuration. DAGs are stored in an [S3 bucket](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), while Astro project configuration files are stored in a Git repository. 

Reviewer 3: Or GCP

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
    classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
    id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[S3 bucket]
    id2-->|"DAG-only deploy </br>(Lambda function)" | id3[Astro Deployment]
    id5-->|"Full project deploy </br> (CI/CD)"|id3
```

> If you migrated to Astro from Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA), this strategy is useful for maintaining a similar workflow for DAG authors. You can set up a Lambda function to push DAGs to your Astronomer Deployment whenever DAG files are updated in your specific S3 bucket.

Reviewer 3: Or GCC

## Create a CI/CD pipeline

> The process for creating an Astro CI/CD template includes the following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you set up a CI/CD workflow on Astro, you will:
```

- Selecting a CI/CD strategy after reviewing this document and the requirements of your team.
- Setting up your repositories and permissions based on your CI/CD strategy.

> - Adding an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Adding an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action`](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action) found in the GitHub Marketplace.
```

> - Selecting a CI/CD strategy after reviewing this document and the requirements of your team.
> - Setting up your repositories and permissions based on your CI/CD strategy.
> - Adding an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Select a CI/CD strategy after reviewing this document and the requirements of your team.
- Set up your repositories and permissions based on your CI/CD strategy.
- Add an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your Git repository(s) based on your preferred CI/CD tool.
```

> - Modifying the Astronomer template or GitHub action to meet the requirements of your organization. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Modify the Astronomer template or GitHub action to meet the requirements of your organization. 
```

> If you use GitHub, Astronomer recommends using the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).(https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you use GitHub, Astronomer recommends using the [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).(https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action) that you can find in the GitHub Marketplace and is maintained by Astronomer.
```

Reviewer 2: All GitHub Actions are found in the GitHub marketplace right?

There are many benefits to configuring a CI/CD workflow on Astro. Specifically, you can:

- Avoid manually running `astro deploy` every time you make a change to your Astro project.
- Ensure that all changes to your Astro project are reviewed and approved by your team before they get pushed to Astro.
- Automate promoting code across development and production environments on Astro when pull requests to certain branches are merged.
- Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or a failure.
- Configure more granular user permissions by managing access and changes to your Astro project source code in your version control tool.

## Choose a deploy strategy

You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many repositories and branches of your project you want to deploy to Astro.

When deciding on a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:

- How many branches of a project do you want to host on Astro? 

> - Do you need to deploy a single production branch to a Deployment, or do you also need to deploy a development branch?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- How many repositories do you want to host your project? Will different parts of your team work on different parts of your project?

Read the following topics to learn which combination of branches and repositories is right for your team. Advanced data teams might follow a custom CI/CD strategy that is not described here and is optimized for a particular use case or team structure. If you're not sure which CI/CD strategy is right for you, contact your customer success representative.

> ### Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Single environment versus multiple environment repositories
```

> When you create a CI/CD pipeline, you first must determine if you want to deploy one or multiple project branches to Astro through CI/CD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you create a CI/CD pipeline, you first must determine how many environments you need to test your DAGs in. Each environment requires its own GitHub branch and implementation in your CI/CD pipeline. 
```

#### Single branch

> The most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Git repository that corresponds to a single Astro project and Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Git repository that corresponds to a single Astro project and Deployment. This solution is best for simple projects where you can tolerate testing and bug fixing in production.
```

- Test all DAG and Astro project changes locally with the Astro CLI. See [Test and troubleshoot locally](test-and-troubleshoot-locally.md).
- Create a new, temporary branch in your Git repository with the change and open a pull request against the `main` branch for review.
- When the pull request is approved and merged to the main branch, the change is automatically deployed to your Deployment on Astro.

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
    classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Local Astro project]-->|Push code change|id2[Feature branch]
    subgraph Git ["Git repository"]
    id2-->|Pull request| id3[Main branch]
    end
    id3-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id4[Astro Deployment]
    style Git fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

Running all of your data pipelines in a single environment means that you don't have to pay for the infrastructure of multiple Deployments, but it limits your ability to test changes on Astro or on development datasets before they are deployed. Astronomer does not recommend this method for production use cases.

#### Multiple branches

> For small to medium-sized data teams running data pipelines in production, Astronomer recommends developing a CI/CD pipeline for multiple branches. With this method, you maintain one Git repository that has permanent branches for different versions of your Astro project. You also have multiple Astro Deployments for each of your branches. If you work at a larger organization, you can adapt this method by creating a Workspace for each team or business use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For small to medium-sized data teams running data pipelines in production, Astronomer recommends developing a CI/CD pipeline that supports multiple environments for running different versions of your project. With this method, you maintain one Git repository that has permanent branches for different versions of your Astro project. You also have multiple Astro Deployments for each of your branches. If you work at a larger organization, you can adapt this method by creating a Workspace for each team or business use case.
```

- Learn the benefits of CI/CD.
- Determine what kind of Deployment and CI/CD strategy you want your data team to use.

When you're ready to implement your CI/CD strategy, see [CI/CD templates](ci-cd.md) for setup steps and examples.

## Benefits of CI/CD on Astro

On Astro, you can use [Deployment API keys](api-keys.md) to automate your code deploys. Astronomer recommends hosting your Astro project source code in a version control tool, such as [GitHub](https://github.com/) or [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/), and setting up a CI/CD workflow for all production environments.

There are many benefits to configuring a CI/CD workflow on Astro. Specifically, you can:

- Avoid manually running `astro deploy` every time you make a change to your Astro project.
- Ensure that all changes to your Astro project are reviewed and approved by your team before they get pushed to Astro.
- Automate promoting code across development and production environments on Astro when pull requests to certain branches are merged.
- Enforce automated testing, which increases code quality and allows your team to respond quickly in case of an error or a failure.

> - Configure more granular user permissions by managing access and changes to your Astro project source code in your version control tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Protect your mission-critical data pipelines by more strictly limiting user permissions on Astro and ensuring that all code deploys are approved in your version control.
```

This might be redundant with the above.... I talked to Chris Cardillo about the permissions thing and it didn't feel right. If this doesn't make sense to you Jake let's just scrap this bullet point

## Choose a deploy strategy

> You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many repositories and environments of your project you want to deploy to Astro.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can set up CI/CD pipelines to manage multiple Deployments and repositories based on your team structure. Before you create your pipeline, you need to determine how many environments and repositories of your project you want to maintain.
```

> When deciding on a strategy, keep the size of your data team in mind while answering the following questions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When deciding on a strategy, keep the size of your data team and the importance of your Airflow DAGs in mind while answering the following questions:
```

- How many different environments do you need to adequately test your DAGs before deploying them to production?
- Do different teams work on different parts of your project? If so, do you need to host your Astro project in multiple repositories?
  
Read the following topics to learn which combination of environments and repositories is right for your team. Advanced data teams might follow a custom CI/CD strategy that is not described here and is optimized for a particular use case or team structure. If you're not sure which CI/CD strategy is right for you, contact your customer success representative.

> ### Single environment versus multiple environment repositories

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Environments
```

Simplify?

> When you create a CI/CD pipeline, you must first determine how many environments you need to test your DAGs in. Each environment requires a Deployment on Astro, as well as its own GitHub branch and implementation in your CI/CD pipeline. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you create a CI/CD pipeline, you must first determine how many environments you need to test your DAGs in. This typically depends on how critical these DAGs are to your business and how much your team expects to spend in infrastructure.

Each environment requires a Deployment on Astro, as well as its own GitHub branch and implementation in your CI/CD pipeline. 
```

#### Single environment

> The most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Git repository that corresponds to a single Astro project and Deployment. This solution is best for simple projects where you can tolerate testing and bug fixing in production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most cost-effective way to get started with CI/CD on Astro is to maintain a single Deployment on Astro for one Astro project. This solution is best for simple projects where you can tolerate testing and bug fixing in production.
```

This method assumes that you have:

- One Astro project.
- One Astro Workspace for your project.
- One Astro Deployment.

> - One primary and permanent branch in your Git repository. Astronomer recommends `main`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- One primary and permanent branch in your Git repository. Astronomer recommends `main`.
- One database or data warehouse that hosts all of the production data that your Airflow DAGs need.
```

- At least two Astro Deployments.

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
    classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
    classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Local Astro project]-->|Push code change|id2[Feature branch]
    subgraph Git ["Git repository"]
    id2-->|Pull request| id3[Dev branch]
    id3 --> id5[Main branch]
    end
    id3-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id4[Dev Deployment]
    id5-->|Deploy through CI/CD| id6[Main Deployment]
    subgraph Astro [Astro]
    id4
    id6
    end
    style Astro fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style Git fill:#bfeaff,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
```

This method provides your team with at least two environments on Astro to test before pushing changes to production. Each Deployment can contain separate versions of your code, as well as separate environment configurations. If you use Snowflake, for example, your development Deployment on Astro can use a virtual data warehouse for development (`DWH Dev`), and your production Deployment can use a different virtual data warehouse for production (`DWH Prod`).

> ### Single repository versus multiple repositories

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Repositories
```

Simplify? Or maybe:

"Choose number of repositories"
"Number of repositories"
"How many repositories"

Astro supports deploying DAG code changes separately from project configuration changes. This means that when you create a CI/CD pipeline for an Astro project, you can choose between the following strategies:

- Maintain a single Git repository for all files in your Astro project.

> - Separate your DAGs from other project files and maintain multiple Git repositories.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Separate your DAGs from other files and maintain multiple Git repositories for a single Astro project.
```

- Store your DAGs in a cloud provider storage solution, such as AWS S3, and the rest of your Astro project files in a dedicated Git repository.

> Develop this strategy in conjunction with your strategy for managing environments. Your CI/CD pipeline can manage deploying multiple branches across multiple repositories. See [Single branch vs. multiple branch repositories](#single-branch-versus-multiple-branch-repositories).

Reviewer 3: Change links if you agree w headings

#### One repository

For most teams, Astronomer recommends creating a single Git repository for each Astro project. This means that your team can make changes to your DAGs, Python packages, and Deployment configuration in a single place. This strategy keeps your code history centralized, makes it easy for developers to contribute code, and avoids synchronization problems across files.

This strategy is recommended if:

- A single team is responsible for both developing DAGs and maintaining Deployments on Astro.

> - Your don't require a dedicated repository for DAGs across your organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You don't require a dedicated repository for DAGs across your organization.
```

> - Less than 30 people interact with or contribute to your Airflow use case.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Less than 30 people interact with or contribute to a single Astro project.
```

  
#### Multiple repositories

> Using a multi-repository CI/CD strategy, you can manage your DAGs in one repository and Astro project settings in another. This strategy is recommended if:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on your organization, you might be required to maintain multiple repositories for a single Astro project. Data teams that implement this strategy typically manage DAGs in one repository and Astro project settings, such as Python packages and worker configuration, in another repository.

This strategy is recommended if:
```

- You want to minimize complexity for project contributors at the expense of a more complex CI/CD pipeline. 

```mermaid
%%{ init: { 'flowchart': { 'curve': 'linear' } } }%%
flowchart LR;
classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
    id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[Git repository]
    id5-->|Full project deploy|id3
    id2-->|DAG-only deploy| id3[Astro Deployment]
```

One limitation of this strategy is that you must keep any local copies of the Astro project synchronized with both repositories in order to test Deployment code locally. Your team members might have inconsistencies in their local environments if they can't access code changes from other team members. Astronomer recommends setting up a `dev` Deployment where DAG authors can see and modify project configurations for testing purposes. 

This strategy requires enabling [DAG-only deploys](deploy-code.md#enable-dag-only-deploys-on-a-deployment) on the target Deployment and setting up your CI/CD pipeline on both Git repositories.

> #### DAG bucket and Git repository to a single Deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Store DAGs in storage bucket
```

Or 
- Store DAGs in cloud storage
- ?

Similar to the multiple repository strategy, this strategy separates the management of DAGs and project configuration. DAGs are stored in an [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) or [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://cloud.google.com/storage) bucket, while Astro project configuration files are stored in a Git repository. 

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    classDef subgraph_padding fill:none,stroke:none
    classDef astro fill:#dbcdf6,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    id1[Admin's local Astro project]-->|Push project changes|id5[Git repository]
    id4[DAG author's local Astro project]-->|Push DAG changes|id2[S3 bucket]
    id2-->|"DAG-only deploy </br>(Lambda function)" | id3[Astro Deployment]
    id5-->|"Full project deploy </br> (CI/CD)"|id3
```

> If you migrated to Astro from Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA) or Google Cloud Composer (GCC), this strategy is useful for maintaining a similar workflow for DAG authors. You can set up a Lambda function to push DAGs to your Astronomer Deployment whenever DAG files are updated in your specific S3 bucket.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you migrated to Astro from Amazon Managed Workflows for Apache Airflow (MWAA) or Google Cloud Composer (GCC), this strategy is useful for maintaining a similar workflow for DAG authors. For example, you can set up a Lambda function to push DAGs to your Astronomer Deployment whenever DAG files are updated in your specific S3 bucket.
```

## Create a CI/CD pipeline

When you set up a CI/CD workflow on Astro, you will:

- Select a CI/CD strategy after reviewing this document and the requirements of your team.
- Set up your repositories and permissions based on your CI/CD strategy.
- Add an Astronomer [CI/CD template](ci-cd.md) to your repositories, or use the Astronomer maintained [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).
- Modify the Astronomer template or GitHub action to meet the requirements of your organization. 

> If you use GitHub, Astronomer recommends using the [`deploy-action` GitHub action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action) that is maintained by Astronomer.

Reviewer 3: Double mention?

Reviewer 2: Removing the reference from the bullet list, since you would still copy a template to use the action.

## Test and validate DAGs in your CI/CD pipeline

> Astronomer recommends that you pytest all Python code in your DAGs. The Astro CLI includes [pytests](test-and-troubleshoot-locally.md#test-dags-with-the-astro-cli) to validate that your DAGs do not have import or syntax errors. You can implement this parse test with the [Astro CLI](cli/astro-dev-parse.md) or the [Deploy Action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action). The default test may not work on all DAGs, especially if they access the Airflow meta database at runtime. In this case, you can write your own parse test using example pytests provided in the default Astro project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends that you pytest all Python code in your DAGs. The Astro CLI includes [pytests](test-and-troubleshoot-locally.md#test-dags-with-the-astro-cli) to validate that your DAGs do not have import or syntax errors. You can implement this parse test with the [Astro CLI](cli/astro-dev-parse.md) or the [Deploy Action](https://github.com/astronomer/deploy-action).

The default test may not work on all DAGs, especially if they access the Airflow metadata database. In this case, you can write your own parse test using example pytests provided in the default Astro project.
```

Add link to the right section in the Deploy Action Marketplace?

Reviewer 2: The reference seems general enough that I'd prefer to keep the link general too. Hard to tell when an external link anchor changes, so this will be future proof.
